---
layout: post
title: Thoughts On Advice
---

Advice is a curious thing. It's a clever little tidbit of information designed to help you make a better decision or help you achieve a goal. People will give you advice about things such as: what phone to buy, what to study in school, what companies to apply to work for, what to invest in, who to date, and so on so forth. This is usually with good intention, but how often are these pieces of advice really beneficial, and furthermore, really applicable to you? So often have I either gotten or read pieces of advice that were meant to help me, but did not achieve that goal. Here are some things that should be kept in mind with regards to receiving advice.

One, advice is subjective and is filled with bias. If someone is giving you a piece of advice, they are giving you what they would do in that situation. They're giving you what they believe the best strategy to be. This piece of information is inadvertently biased with their experiences, preferences, and knowledge of the situation. It often does not account for what your preferences are. For example, if you were going to invest $X and you were looking as to what to invest in, it is likely that you are going to get a number of different responses. You'll get individuals (who in this case we shall assume you trust equally) who will tell to keep your cash at home, leave it sitting in the bank, buy a treasury bond, invest in mutual funds or go invest in an emerging asset or industry (for example, Bitcoin). These are all valid options, however, they are all have varying amounts of risk. In fact, in this scenario, these options that are given to you can tell you about the risk aversion of the individual providing the advice. Do you follow the advice of the very risk averse and leave your money sitting at home or in a bank? Or do you follow the risk-taking behaviour and invest in an unknown area hoping to capitalize on the expectation of growth? These are their opinions or investment strategies and are what they believe the best option to be. The answer is that you pick the advice that best takes into account your preferences. It makes no sense to go out and invest in the riskiest investment if you have no taste for risk. Seldom will you have someone provide you with advice that matches your preferences and takes into account your concerns. If someone uses an iPhone, they are going to tell you that the iPhone is the best phone. Or if they study business, they are going to say that business is the best field to go in to. It is important to detect these biases and take them into account when valuing someone's opinion. Without doing so, you may be jeopardizing your decision-making and fail to make the best decision according to your needs.

Two, plenty of advice is overly generic and may lack detail. Don't fall into the trap of believing everything that you hear or read. If people tell you that in order to get better at something, a particular skill for example, that you need to put in hard work. There is very likely a correlation here, however what exactly do they mean by hard work? Just doing the same thing or utilizing the same principles over and over again is not going to really help you get better after a certain point (Law of Marginal Diminishing Returns). If they tell you that to get a job you just need to apply everywhere and you're going to get something. This is mathematically true, but if you keep applying to jobs that you lack qualifications for, this is not the best advice. You might be better off applying to fewer jobs, for which you are more qualified and have a higher chance of success. The key thing here is to be able to see when you are getting generic advice and probe to get more detail. If someone is giving you advice, keep asking questions until you've gotten something that helps you or until you've learned something new. I've heard plenty of entrepreneurs give talks about entrepreneurship and on being successful. You often will hear generic pieces of advice like "follow your passion" or "validate your market". This is all fine and dandy, but what is the use if you don't know how to identify your passion or if you don't know what exactly qualifies for market validation? Then this advice is not going to help you. One of my favourite parts about hearing entrepreneurs give talks is that sometimes you'll hear a great story about them running into a problem and the steps they took to solve it. I've heard about entrepreneurs that have failed because they fell out of love with their business because they were not really passionate about what they were doing and how they went on to figure out what was next. Others have talked about how they failed because consumers did not want to pay for their products. They started a business with a product that solved a problem for a consumer but without being able to generate revenue they eventually had to close up shop. If you are getting advice or asking for advice, be sure that you are actually getting something valuable and beneficial from it.

Lastly, this is all an iteration process. The goal is to get new information and use that to refine, reshape or reimagine. You want to build on your opinions and ideas to make them better. Even if you get some advice that is unpleasant or hard to take in, remember that at the end of the day it's helping you get better. It's better to know you're wrong early and improve than to find out later when you have less time. You can make your approaches better, or pivot if need be, or flat out scrap if you don't believe in them anymore. Make your own opinions and get better.

The keys here are: be cautious of bias, be sure you're learning something, and be prepared to iterate, even if it is difficult. 

Thanks for reading!
