---
layout:post
title: Rationality
---

Rationality is the state of being reasonable, or being in a state that could objectively be seen as being logical and based on fact. 

In economics, the concept of rationality is based on three assumptions with regards to one preferences. Firstly, the preferences must be complete and exhaustive, they must take into account all of the possible choices. Secondly, the preferences must be transitive, you must be able to rank the choices and your rankings must be consistent. For example, if you prefer Coke to Diet Coke, and Diet Coke to Ginger Ale, you must not prefer Ginger Ale to Coke. This would be paradoxical. Thirdly, the preferences must be reflexive. This means that your preferences should hold the same relation even if another element or choice is introduced into the problem. Building on our Coke example, if you now had a choice of Fresca, and you prefer it to Diet Coke but not to Coke, your preference relation would be Coke > Fresca > Diet Coke > Ginger Ale. Here Coke is still prefered to Diet Coke and Ginger Ale and Diet Coke is still preferred to Ginger Ale. These assumptions are fairly straightforward and violations of them yield obvious inconsistencies. Based off of this, we could say irrationality is either a violation of these assumptions (complete, transitive, reflexive) or a violation of ceteris paribus.

Ceteris paribus is Latin and it means all other things held the same. Essentially, this means that the only variable changing is the one you're analyzing. Let's revisit the drink example from before. Let's also imagine this drink choice is coming while you are having lunch at a fast food chair. It means that every other aspect of your visit is the same except for the drink. The cup is the same, the straw is the same, the fries are salted in exactly the same manner, the burger has sesame seeds in exactly the same spots, the seats are the same, the attractive blonde across the room is still drop dead gorgeous and sadly still not looking at you. Every aspect of your visit is identical except for the flavour of your drink. This is good to use in a theoretical framework, and certain controllable environments (e.g. a science experiment) otherwise very rarely useful practically.

Literature has frequently dubbed people to be irrational. I don't contest this, however irrationality seems to stem from either the lack of understanding of the decision maker's preferences or the lack of ceteris paribus. The notion of irrationality is something that I will continue to explore and write about.