---
layout: post
title: What Is Economics?
---

The first thing that comes to mind when posed with the question "What is economics?" is supply and demand (general equilibrium analysis) or money. These are the two most common associations with the term "economics". Overall, it is widely defined as being the social science studying the: production, consumption and distribution of goods and services. This often focuses on the ideas surrounding scarcity and how resources can be utilized in comparison to one another. Where this is a fair interpretation of the science, these definitions seem a bit narrow for my liking.

My take is this, economics at its core is a science about decision making and value. This sounds and is exceptionally broad, as it should be as economics is universally applicable. In this discussion, the emphasis is going to be on microeconomics. 

The focus is on microeconomics because for all intents and purposes, macroeconomics is microeconomics on the aggregate. Macroeconomics looks at the economy as a whole (an aggregation of the individuals) and focuses on topics such as: national income, international trade, unemployment, and inflation. It typically focuses on a national or international scale. At its core, it is microeconomics focused on the larger scale. Macroeconomics gives you information as to the impact that individual decisions, on the aggregate, are having on the market and the current state of the market. Furthermore, it also helps to give a sense of how those decisions will change based on the variable conditions of the marketplace. It’s also important to note here, that any set can be broken down into a number of elements.
Microeconomics is a small scale version looking more at how individuals (people, firms, or markets) make decisions and behave within an overall economy. Each of the individuals/firm represents an element within the set of the population. Microeconomics is really a look to see how individual economic agents perceive value and how they make decisions based on their assessments. 

Microeconomics can be split into a number of different areas including: competitive markets, consumer demand theory, production theory, supply and demand, labour economics, and game theory. At the center of all these areas, is the notion of constrained optimization. We are looking to see how we can make the best decision in order to maximizing our utility (benefit) with the limitations that are imposed on us. This can be summarized as getting the best value. The initial question may not explicitly ask about getting the best value, however, ultimately any analysis is based on trying to get the most out of what we have available. An example would be if we are a firm, and are producing a good Y, we may be looking to analyze how many units of Y we should produce. In this scenario, our initial question may be how many units of Y should we produce. However, when we approach this, we perform our calculations in order to see what would get us the highest amount. We would look to see what the market considers demand equation is (how much is demanded for a given price) and see how much would need to be supplied in order to yield the highest profit.  Really the question is, how many units of Y should we produce in order to make the most money. Any economic agent is looking to make the decisions that yield them the most benefit according to their preferences. Firms are trying to make as much money as possible and individuals are trying to get the most bang for their dollar. 

This is why I consider economics to be about value and decision making. When we break down the set (population) into its elements (individuals/firms), we find that all the questions are about how to maximize utility of a given situations. This boils down to assessing the market value and making a decision based on the value determined. Whether the decision is to buy or sell or trade, it doesn’t matter. The value determination, and the decision making is at the heart of the process. It seems very broad and general and quite frankly can be a little uncomfortable at times, however it is an important notion to understand. 

To summarize: economics can be stripped down into being the science dealing with value and decision making. This notion underpins all of economics including areas such as: game theory, labour economics, competitive markets, inflation, national income, international trade, and consumer theory.

